---
title: 'Something about 3n + 1'
date: 2025-02-16
permalink: /posts/2025/02/collatz-post/
tags:
  - life update
---

# 3n + 1
The Collatz Conjecture, or the 3n + 1 problem, is an infamous and (at time of writing) unproven conjecture. Simply stated, the Collatz conjecture states that for all positive integers *n*, running the following procedure will eventually result in the interminable 4-2-1 cycle:
```
function collatz(n):
    if n % 2 == 0:
        return collatz(n/2)
    else:
        return collatz(3n+1)
```
The reason we call it the 3n + 1 *problem* is because we can not prove this fact. It's easy to *observe* that we reach this cycle for any number that we check- and mathematicians have checked an incomprehensibly large amount of positive integers ([up to ~2.39e21](http://www.ericr.nl/wondrous/pathrecs.html) at time of writing).

Now why am I, a computer scientist, wasting any amount of time on this brain-draining dome-wrecking time-waster of a problem? Well, the short answer is that I'm not. Not anymore, anyways. But a while back, sometime during my undergraduate degree when I first heard this problem described, I was very interested. Like any curious left-brain, I wanted to understand what all the smartest people in the world say we don't understand: *Does the conjecture hold for all n? Can we prove it?* 

In the end I was unable to prove anything of any significance whatsoever. This was expected, me not being a field-leading number theorist. But my pattern-seeking monkey brain did notice a "pattern" in the path-trace tree produced by the 3n + 1 process.